James Brown by Peter Shapiro

Call it the Muhammed Ali principle. If you talk up your own game as much as the Godfather of Soul, you've got to be one bad motherfucker. Listening to (and watching) James Brown walk it like he talks it with every glide, stride, and shimmy is the main pleasure of his music. There's a vicarious thrill to watching Mr. Dynamite camel-walk across a stage up to the mic to deliver one of his trademark grunts with precision timing. With James Brown, the tiniest gesture - a grunt, a shake of the head, an off the cuff vamp - meant everything. No one - not even Phil Spector or Trevor Horn - packed so much (timbres, forward motion, sparkle, intensity) into each bar. Even when Brown started to economize in the 1970s, he always understood what made pop music great in the first place: an immediacy and momentum that steamrollered all obstacles. Brown was at once the most superficial musician in history and the most profound: there was nothing below the surface of his performances, yet his links to an ancient tradition with roots in the community musics of West and Central Africa are glaringly obvious. Moreover, Brown was the most assertively black personality ever to be accorded mainstream acceptance in America. His esteem in both African American and white communities was enough to have him courted by politicians such as Vice President Hubert Humphrey for his "Don't Be A Drop-out" campaign. On the day Martin Luther King was assassinated, television stations in cities with large black populations aired a live James Brown concert in the hope that it would prevent rioting; it worked. As with Louis Armstrong and Jimmy Rodgers it would be impossible to overstate his importance or overestimate his stature.

Moreover, unlike most legendary musical figures Brown's musical legacy has actually been treated with the respect it deserves. And it's a huge legacy. Not including side projects, he has at least 85 albums to his credit - not bad for a singles artist. For years Brown's best records languished in PolyGram's vaults, while disposable items such as Sex Machine Today (a 1975 attempt to recapture past glories) remained in circulation. Then the label placed Brown's catalogue in the hands of scholars and former associates like Cliff White, Harvey Weiner and Alan Leeds. They have subsequently produced a series of revelatory reissues that are landmarks of curatorial diligence and corporate largesse. 

James Brown
Live At the Apollo
Polydor CD 1990
(orig. King LP 1963)

James Brown was born in a shack on the outskirts of Barnwell, South Carolina on May 3rd, 1933. Dancing for pennies as a sideline to picking cotton in his adopted hometown of Augusta, Georgia, he was arrested for breaking into a car to steal a coat when he was 15 years old. Paroled in 1952, he joined lifelong sidekick Bobby Byrd's Gospel Starlighters, who later changed their name to The Flames and stepped into Little Richard's shoes when he got too big to play local dates. Brown's irrepressible energy and acrobatics quickly garnered The Flames a following, and their first single, "Please Please Please" (1956), eventually sold over a million copies.

Before going on to rewrite the rules about the role of rhythm in Western music, Mr. Please Please laid waste to the standard notion of a ballad singer. Like that other funky megalomaniac, George Clinton, Brown always wanted to be a crooner - in his fantasies he was a camel-walking cross between Louis Jordan and Billy Eckstine. Ray Charles may have brought the sound of gospel into R&B, but Brown brought into popular music the speaking-in-tongues possession exhibited by such shouters as The Five Blind Boys Of Missisippi's Archie Brownlee an The Swan Silvertones' Claude Jeter.

The greatest moment, both artistically and historically, of Brown's early career was Live At The Apollo. Convinced that his fans would want a document of his electric live show, Brown approached King Records supremo Syd Nathan to record some dates at Harlem's Apollo Theatre. Nathan refused, but Brown went ahead, even paying for the recording himself. Shelved until May 1963, Live At The Apollo eventually hit number two on the American album charts. It is undoubtedly one of the most brilliant performances of Brown's incandescent career. Live At The Apollo is pure physicality transposed to vinyl: flash, coruscating motion, bravado, urgency. Despite the crowd noise, Brown is so absorbed in the magnificence of his performance, hearing it now is like spying on someone dancing in front of a bedroom mirror. The only problem with listening to Live At The Apollo, or any of his live albums, is how the crowd screaming alerts you to what you missed by not being there: Brown doing the mashed potato or good-footing it across the stage or throwing his cape off to come back to the mic one last time. Not only was Live At The Apollo a commercial and artistic triumph, but as a result of Brown's own financing and business acumen, the album, along with Ray Charles's growing independence, became a high profile symbol of the viability of African American self-sufficiency. 

Foundations Of Funk - A Brand New Bag: 1964-1969
Polydor 2 x CD 1998

Beginning with Live At The Apollo, Brown embarked on an unparalleled period of world-changing activity that lasted until "Funky President (People It's Bad)" ended its R&B chart run at the end of 1974. During those 11 years, Brown singlehandedly (with some help from his group) orchestrated a tectonic shift in the foundation of music. Not unlike the compositional methods of Charles Mingus or Duke Ellington, Brown would sing and hum the song parts to bandleaders Nat Jones and Pee Wee Ellis, who would then transcribe them for the other musicians. Estranged from King over the Live At The Apollo affair, Brown adopted a holding pattern for the latter half of 1963 and the beginning of 1964, recording versions of "Caldonia" and "Things That I Used To Do" for Mercury subsidiary Smash. Then, in May, with newcomers such as saxophonists Maceo Parker and Nat Jones on board, Brown and his group recorded "Out Of Sight", which found a glorious middle ground between his screaming cover of The "5" Royales' "Think" and "Prisoner Of Love". With one ear tuned to the latest street slang and the other to Jesse Hill's 1960 proto-funk classic "Ooh Poo Pah Doo", Brown crafted a sinuous and sinewy groove that was as taut and lithe as his own dancing. 

"Out Of Sight" was light years away from the mainstream of black American music as defined by Sam Cooke and Motown, but nothing could have prepared the world for "Papa's Got A Brand New Bag". Its bone-rattling effect was largely due to the fact that the master tape was speeded up during post-production to give the record a claustrophobic feel. As a consequence, the blaring horns, piercing guitar and ricocheting rhythm section sound that much more intense. Brown reduces the entire gospel vocal tradition to falsetto shrieks and guttural roars. But beyond the glare and flamboyance, "Papa" is also innovative: the 'chank' of the guitar part might well be the genesis of reggae. More significantly, the record upgraded the once anonymous instrumental bottom end to the be all and end all of music.

He followed "Papa's Got A Brand New Bag" with the equally marvelous "I Got You (I Feel Good)", "Money Won't Change You" and "Let Yourself Go". The call-and-response interplay between guitarists Jimmy Nolen and Alphonso 'Country' Kellum and the horn section on the 1967 "Let Yourself Go" marks the moment when the guitar began to supplant the horns as the main instrumental focus in Brown's music. Nolen and Kellum were brought even further up front on the two records that triggered the shift away from soul towards funk: "Cold Sweat" and "There Was A Time". With the exception of the incomparably 'nastay' Dyke & The Blazers, nothing else at the time sounded quite like "Cold Sweat". On the record, Brown uses his voice as he uses his group - as a percussion instrument. The track features the catchiest horn hook ever; and during the "give the drummer some" interlude you can hear Clyde Stubblefield and bassist Bernard Odum inventing the next 30 years of music.

All of the above and a lot more are included on Foundations Of Funk. In addition to complete version of "The Popcorn", "I Got The Feeling", "You Got To Have A Mother For Me", and "Brother Rapp", this double CD contains "Ain't It Funky Now", "Say It Loud - I'm Black And I'm Proud", "funky Drummer" and a killer live version of "Out Of Sight / Bring It Up (Hipster's Avenue)" for which Brown summoned forth the greatest scream of his career. The highlight, however, is an unreleased take of "Cold Sweat", which gives a fascinating insight into his improvisational approach to composition. 

Sex Machine
Polydor CD 1998
(orig. King 2 x LP 1970)

On the cusp of the 1970s, as if in anticipation of Prog rock's tyranny over complex time signatures and chord changes, Brown and his assorted barbarian pipers burst through the gates of dawn and instigated an uprising against the concept of 'progressive'. The 1969 "Give It Up Or Turn It Loose" and "Ain't It Funky" are nothing more than vamps on single-horn licks, with Brown grunting the respective title phrases a few times.

With the exception of Bobby Byrd and drummers Jabo Starks and Clyde Stubblefield, Brown's entire group walked out in March 1970 over a pay dispute. They were replaced by a band of Cincinnati teenagers called The Pacesetters who used to hang around the King studios. Renamed The JBs, the group's core members were two brothers, bassist William 'Bootsy' and guitarist Phelps 'Catfish' Collins. Quickly recognizing the Collins brothers as gifted rhythm players, Brown forever banished the horns to the background of his music. The first record cut with the new group was "Get Up (I Feel Like Being A) Sex Machine", which ranks alongside "Papa's Got A Brand New Bag" and "Cold Sweat" as one of Brown's most influential releases. Only two things matter about the record: Bootsy's bass, which has more popping, slithering, sliding, strutting gangster lean than a hustlers' convention on Lennox Avenue, and Catfish's tersely angular chicken-scratch guitar. With Jabo Starks's minimal drum part for company, the tension built up by the liquid bass and rawboned guitar is staggering. After recording the nearly as good "Super Bad", The JBs rerecorded "Sex Machine" and simulated a medley of "Bewildereed / I Got The Feelin' / Give It Up Or Turn It Loose" for a 'live' double album that was originally going to be titled James Brown At Home With His Bad Self. The album was eventually released with the title Sex Machine. Much of it was indeed legitimate live material recorded with Brown's 1969 group in Georgia, but it is The JBs' material, overdubbed with audience noise, that steals the show. The new version of "Sex Machine" is just as good as the single; "Bewildered" even surpasses the original version; and letting Bootsy loose on the "Give It Up Or Turn It Loose" groove is a bit like setting a fox in a chicken run.

Hot Pants
Polydor CD 1988
(orig. Polydor LP 1971)

Brown left King after Sex Machine. Hot Pants was his first album for Polydor, and if it is also his finest funk-era album, it is principally by default. For one thing, it is not a double and it has only four tracks. In addition, as the first album recorded after Bootsy and Catfish left to form their own group, Hot Pants is the greatest testament to James Brown's powers of regeneration through the vamp, which inaugurated his reign as "Minister of the new, new heavy funk". As minimal in their way as anything by Steve Reich, "Blues & Pants", "Can't Stand It", "Escape-ism" and "Hot Pants (She's Gotta Use What She's Got To Get Where She Wants)" relish the fact that they go nowhere fast - they hit their groove from the get-go and stay there for an average of seven and a half minutes. Without Bootsy's virtuosic if somewhat dominating basslines, the track on Hot Pants were anchored around Hearlon 'Cheese' Martin's droning yet fearsome guitar comps solo runs, and bassist Fred Thomas's rudimentary pulses. Hot Pants is groove as defined by the Oxford English Dictionary ("a monotonous routine, a rut"), almost completely stripped of its metaphorical connotations. An American Top 25 hit, "Escape-ism" is apparently the vamp the group played to kill time while they waited for Bobby Byrd to show up for the recording session of "I Know You Got Soul" (the CD reissue includes the complete 19 minute take with Soul Brother No. 1 mumbling and stumbling his way through Little Willie John and Jimmy McGriff references). "Hot Pants" itself is basically Fela Kuti's career in nine minutes (minus the three conga players): mesmerizing, hypnotic, interlocking polyrhythms; naive politics; and a less than salubrious view of women. Despite the notoriety and enormous commercial success of "Escape-ism" and "Hot Pants", "Can't Stand It" is the track that ushered in the era of 'the new, new heavy funk'. A remake of Brown's 1967 single "I Can't Stand Myself (When You Touch Me)", it marks the complete transition of the chicken-scratch guitar riff from an integral part of the rhythm section to the music's lead element. Catfish's guitar licks had a bell-like tone to them - they still sounded like they were played by an instrument capable of producing harmony and melody - but Cheese's runs are so intense that they sound as though they've got no tone at all, the strings reverberating without resonating. 

This guitar sound survived as Brown's signature until the dawn of disco. Despite Jabo Starks's incomparable rhythm patterns and Fred Thomas's increasingly fluid basslines, singles such as the 1972 "There It Is" and The JBs' "Doing It To Death", and albums like the 1973 The Payback and 1974 Hell, hang almost entirely on the choked riffs of Cheese and Jimmy Nolen. The Payback, in particular, explores the deepest reaches of mantric wah-wah funk, with tantric cuts that never resolve themselves.

Brown's last significant single of the funk era was the 1976 furious "Get Up Offa That Thing (Release The Pressure)", but by that point "The Original Disco Man" was eclipsed by a genre that took the concept of "Sex Machine" far more literally than the man who invented it.

The JBs
Food For Thought
P-Vine CD 1995
(orig. People LP 1972)

"Ladies and gentleman, there are seven acknowledged wonders of the world," announced MC Danny Ray, introducing The JBs on stage. "You are about to witness the eighth." Brown was notorious for being a vicious taskmaster, but given the often ad hoc nature of his group, he had to be. With drummers subbing for sick bassists and trumpet players claiming to be sax players in order to land the gigs; with recording whenever and wherever it felt right, and with occasionally less than a week to rehearse a new group before hitting the road, the Godfather had to instill his troops with a sense of discipline and fear worthy of La Cosa Nostra.

With Brown laying down the law and trombonist Fred Wesley arranging various riffs into vamps, Food For Thought, The JBs' first album under their own name, is easily as good as - if not better than - any of Brown's own funk-era albums. Comprised of three different line-ups (one including such fusion luminaries as Randy Brecker, Joe Farrell and Bob Cranshaw) recorded over six different sessions, Food For Thought makes it on pure kinetics alone. "The Grunt", recorded when the Collins brothers and drummer Frank Waddy were still in the fold, was probably the rawest track associated with Brown since "Cold Sweat". It features one of Bootsy's most swinging basslines alongside the greatest maracas-playing this side of Jerome Green; the boss's screams are replaced by a squealing sax that became the foundation of The Bomb Squad's productions for Public Enemy; the other horns are pure Afrobeat call and response; and it sounds like it was recorded in the studio bathroom. "My Brother" (probably devised as a novel way to get round payola) has a chicken-scratch riff outdone only by Nile Rodgers and Reggie Lucas, while "Pass the Peas", one of the three greatest songs ever written about food (the other two are Willie Bobo's "Fried Neckbones And Some Home Fries" and Irakere's "Bacalao Con Pan"), is introduced by Bobby Roach and Bobby Byrd waxing nostalgic about Southern treats like Hoppin' John and chitterlings.

Food For Thoughts was swiftly followed by Doing It To Death (1973). Nearly as good as The JBs' debut, it picked up where Hot Pants left off, with both the title track and "More Peas" (featuring Cheese and Nolen's most atonal guitars) clocking in at over 12 minutes. Brown's bizarre association with Richard Nixon reared its ugly head with the matter-of-fact priorities of "You Can Have Watergate, Just Gimme Some Bucks And I'll Be Straight"; but their next album, credited to Fred Wesley and The JBs, chose its political allies more carefully. Released in 1974, the theme of Damn Right I Am Somebody was inspired by one of Jesse Jackson's catchphrases, while the music was undoubtedly inspired by the success of Herbie Hancock's Headhunters album. Brown's first excursion into the realm of synthesizers produced the landmark tracks "Same Beat" and "Blow Your Head", with Soul Brother No. 1 himself playing the Moog riffs in a stye that opened up street funk to the cosmic regions being explored by Hancock. 

The JBs albums are only the most well known and successful of umpteen side projects, most of which appeared on Brown's own People label. When Brown's group walked out in 1970, they all, with the exception of Fred Wesley, recorded Doing Their Own Things as Maceo & All The King's Men for the House Of The Fox label. When he returned to the fold, Maceo recorded Us! with the JBs as Maceo & The Macks in 1974. The ever-loyal Bobby Byrd was repaid with some of Brown's best grooves: "I Know You Got Soul" and "You've Got To Have A Job". Byrd's wife Vicki Anderson answered the Godfather's chauvinism with killer tracks like "Answer To Mother Popcorn (I Got A Mother For You)", and "Message From The Soul Sisters". Meanwhile, Marva Whitney's 1969 album It's My Thing came up with the perfect retort to The Isley Brothers' "It's Your Thing".

Rob Base & DJ E-Z Rock
'It Takes Two'
Profile 12" 1988

Public Enemy
'Rebel Without A Pause'
From: It Take A Nation Of Millions To Hold Us Back
Def Jam CD/MC/LP 1988

It is safe to say that hiphop would not exist without the Godfather. Brown more or less invented the breakbeat with "Cold Sweat", while "Give It Up Or Turn It Loose", "Get On The Good Foot" and "Funky Drummer" were all B-boy anthems. Hiphop pioneer Afrika Bambaataa paid tribute to "Brother Rapp"'s reconfiguration of rhythm by recording "Unity" with him in 1984. With a classic 1980s street-funk backing courtesy of The Sugarhill Gang's Keith LeBlanc, Doug Wimbish and Skip McDonald, "Unity" was Brown's best record in ages, but his second coming would have to wait until Eric B & Rakim's 1986 single, "I Know You Got Soul". 

Based on Bobby Byrd's Brown-produced track of the same name, "I Know You Got Soul" helped usher in the era of sampling: as Stetsasonic put it, "To tell the truth, James Brown was old/Until Eric and Rak came out with 'I Know You Got Soul'". "I Know You Got Soul" was so influential that a virtual James Brown appeared on hundreds of records in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and according to legend, Brown hired someone to check new releases for uncleared samples. "I Know You Got Soul" was rather literal in its Brown quotations, but in 1988 two records appeared that heard his disembodied shrieks and chopped-up beats as the main elements in a chaotic urban soundscape. 

Cited as the greatest single of all time by Spin magazine in 1989, "It Takes Two" by Rob Base & DJ E-Z Rock ranks as one of the most breathtakingly immediate records ever made by someone who was not James Brown. Of course, the part that grabs you by the seat of your pants is a loop of James Brown's trademark yelp and grunt that electrified "It Takes Two" with Brownian motion. The loop (as well as the beat and the vocal hook) comes from Lyn Collins's 1972 single, "Think (About It)". Probably Brown's most important outside production, "Think" is his most sampled record after "Funky Drummer" and "Give It Up Or Turn It A Loose". It Takes Two, the duo's 1988 album containing the single, is still available on a BMG CD.

Where Bob Base and E-Z Rock had the technology to make Brown's energy positively bionic, Public Enemy and their producers, The Bomb Squad, turned Brown into white noise. Brown is all over Public Enemy's two classic albums, It Takes A Nation Of Millions To Hold Us Back and Fear Of A Black Planet, but he is torn to shreds, reversed, stunted and détourned. Aside from Chuck D's rap, Flavor Flav's interjections, a brief bridge and a synth bass, there is nothing on "Rebel Without A Pause" but a sample of "Funky Drummer" and a mind-boggling sax loop from The JBs' "The Grunt". In the late 1960s and early 1970s Brown was the sound of Black Pride. In The Bomb Squad's hands, the sound of JBs' saxophonist Robert McCullough blowing his diaphragm out to produce an impossibly high-pitched squeal became emblematic of hiphop's menace and alienation. "The Grunt" also appears on "Night Of The Living Baseheads", which takes Brown's tantric funk to a new extreme. Built around a one-second trombone sample, "Night Of The Living Baseheads" doesn't even permit the tiny phrase to resolve itself, cutting it off before it finishes and repeating it throughout the entire track, creating more tension than Bootsy and Catfish managed on "Sex Machine".

James Brown
Star Time
Polydor 4 x CD 1991

Brown's new status as the detonator of the hiphop bomb was the impetus for PolyGram's ambitious 1990s reissue program. No major figure has been treated better by back catalogue reconfiguration than Brown, and few box sets have been better received than Star Time. Almost universally hailed as the greatest album of all time upon its release, Star Time threatens a consensus as stultifying as that surrounding Sgt. Pepper. Not only is it a near-perfect selection of the man's known music, it also features revelations like the original take of "Papa's Got A Brand New Bag", so you can hear how it sounded before the tape was sped up, and the first appearance of material scheduled for the aborted Love, Power, Peace live triple album. Star Time is that rare anthology: with only one dud track across four CDs, it makes an undeniable argument for the greatness of its subject. The one problem is that it underlines the absence of an equivalent iconic figure in contemporary music. Perhaps this is his ultimate legacy: by reducing popular music to its barest essentials and creating the source material for the first genre totally reliant on technology, James Brown killed the pop star.